Cervical cancer is the most prevalent form of cancer in women in developing countries and the second most common cause of
cancer death. 

In the Unites States, because of the sensitivity and availability of Pap smears, the incidence is much lower, with just more than 11,000 cases of invasive cervical cancer
diagnosed in 2007 .

Cervical cancer can be a lethal disease, however, with the survival rate of patients diagnosed with locally advanced
cervical cancer (stage II-IV) of only 50% at 5 years.

Treatment for cervical cancer has improved through randomized trials showing the benefit of sensitizing chemotherapy
added to radiotherapy for locally advanced disease (1–3).

However, there remain a number of patients who still fail treatment, for whom salvage therapy has limited success because it is applied too late.

Therefore, by following group guidelines, there is a subset of patients who will be overtreated (who perhaps did not need the full treatment), as well as a
subset of patients who will be undertreated (who will fail even with the standard treatment).

A test identifying these two groups could be used to individualize treatments, giving less aggressive therapy to the first group and more aggressive
therapy to the second group. In other malignancies, such as breast cancer, biological markers are already used to guide treatment decisions.

This approach has been successful in some cancer types in identifying groups of patients with more aggressive tumors who
are more likely to fail treatment, such as has been done in breast cancer.

Gene expression profiling in cervical cancer has been done and can differentiate the pathologic subtypes of
cancer versus benign conditions (5–7). There are additionally cervical cancer gene signatures identified that predict resistance
to radiation alone 

A recent study evaluated patients by microarray that were treated with modern therapy consisting of chemotherapy and radiation (10). Although the sample
numbers were small, they were able to identify gene expression patterns that were different in patients that did or did not fail
treatment. However, a significant gene signature separating patients who failed and those who did not was not identified.

In this study, biopsies were obtained both before
treatment (pretreatment samples) and during treatment (midtreatment samples). Samples were obtained from 34 patients,
and 22 pretreatment, 14 mid-treatment, and 13 paired samples
had RNA of sufficient quality to perform gene expression profiling. As previously reported (11), f9,000 genes were studied
for expression changes, and no differences in gene expression
were measurable in pretreatment samples when comparing
stage, age, or ethnic groups. There was a gene signature that
separated histologic subtypes, however. In addition, unsupervised cluster analysis was able to separate gene expression
profiles between biopsies obtained pre- and mid-treatment in
the great majority of cases, showing 91 genes up-regulated and
251 genes down-regulated. Gene expression patterns also
clustered patients into groups, although at the time of that
analysis, clinical data had not been collected, so correlation of
these ‘‘gene signature groups’’ with outcome was not possible.

Because the clinical data from RTOG 0128 have now
matured, in this report we were able to analyze the gene
expression profiles and their correlation with clinical outcome.
We studied gene expression patterns pretreatment, midtreatment, and also the changes in gene expression between
these two time points to identify gene expression signatures
that would predict failure or success of current standard
treatment consisting of chemotherapy and radiation therapy
for locally advanced cervical cancer. Although we were unable
to identify a gene signature from patients before treatment that
predicted outcome, we were able to identify a statistically
significant seven-gene signature of gene expression changes that
separated patients by outcome, defined as local-regional
control or local-regional failure. Although others have reported
gene expression changes with treatment in cervical cancer (10),
this is the first study that we know of to show that these
changes can predict the response to treatment as measured by
local control.
